3GPP TS 38.202 V19.0.0 (2025-09)

Technical Specification

3rd Generation Partnership Project;

Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network;

NR;

Services provided by the physical layer

(Release 19)

The present document has been developed within the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP TM) and may be further elaborated for the purposes of 3GPP..The present document has not been subject to any approval process by the 3GPP Organizational Partners and shall not be implemented.This Specification is provided for future development work within 3GPP only. The Organizational Partners accept no liability for any use of this Specification.Specifications and Reports for implementation of the 3GPP TM system should be obtained via the 3GPP Organizational Partners' Publications Offices.

Keywords

3GPP, New Radio, Layer 1

3GPP

Postal address

3GPP support office address

650 Route des Lucioles - Sophia Antipolis

Valbonne - FRANCE

Tel.: +33 4 92 94 42 00 Fax: +33 4 93 65 47 16

Internet

http://www.3gpp.org

Copyright Notification

No part may be reproduced except as authorized by written permission.The copyright and the foregoing restriction extend to reproduction in all media.

© 2025, 3GPP Organizational Partners (ARIB, ATIS, CCSA, ETSI, TSDSI, TTA, TTC).

All rights reserved.

UMTS™ is a Trade Mark of ETSI registered for the benefit of its members

3GPP™ is a Trade Mark of ETSI registered for the benefit of its Members and of the 3GPP Organizational PartnersLTE™ is a Trade Mark of ETSI registered for the benefit of its Members and of the 3GPP Organizational Partners

GSM® and the GSM logo are registered and owned by the GSM Association

Contents

Foreword4

1Scope5

2References5

3Definitions of terms, symbols and abbreviations5

3.1Terms5

3.2Symbols5

3.3Abbreviations5

4Services and functions of the physical layer6

4.1General6

4.2Overview of L1 functions6

5Model of physical layer of the UE6

5.1Uplink model7

5.1.1Uplink shared channel7

5.1.2Random access channel7

5.2Downlink model8

5.2.1Downlink shared channel8

5.2.2Broadcast channel8

5.2.3Paging channel9

5.3Sidelink model10

5.3.1Sidelink shared channel10

5.3.2Broadcast channel11

6Simultaneous transmission and reception of physical channels and physical signals12

6.1Uplink12

6.2Downlink13

6.3Sidelink15

7Measurements provided by the physical layer17

7.1UE measurements17

Annex A (informative):Change history18

# Foreword

This Technical Specification has been produced by the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP).

The contents of the present document are subject to continuing work within the TSG and may change following formal TSG approval. Should the TSG modify the contents of the present document, it will be re-released by the TSG with an identifying change of release date and an increase in version number as follows:

Version x.y.z

where:

xthe first digit:

1presented to TSG for information;

2presented to TSG for approval;

3or greater indicates TSG approved document under change control.

ythe second digit is incremented for all changes of substance, i.e. technical enhancements, corrections, updates, etc.

zthe third digit is incremented when editorial only changes have been incorporated in the document.

# 1Scope

The present document is a technical specification of the services provided by the physical layer of 5G-NR to upper layers.

# 2References

The following documents contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of the present document.

[1]3GPP TR 21.905: "Vocabulary for 3GPP Specifications"

[2]3GPP TS 38.201: "NR; Physical Layer – General Description"

[3]3GPP TS 38.211: "NR; Physical channels and modulation"

[4]3GPP TS 38.212: "NR; Multiplexing and channel coding"

[5]3GPP TS 38.213: "NR; Physical layer procedures for control"

[6]3GPP TS 38.214: "NR; Physical layer procedures for data"

[7]3GPP TS 38.215: "NR; Physical layer measurements"

[8]3GPP TS 38.306: "NR; User Equipment (UE) radio access capabilities"

# 3Definitions of terms, symbols and abbreviations

## 3.1Terms

For the purposes of the present document, the terms and definitions given in TR 21.905 [1] and the following apply. A term defined in the present document takes precedence over the definition of the same term, if any, in TR 21.905 [1].

## 3.2Symbols

For the purposes of the present document, the following symbols apply:

## 3.3Abbreviations

For the purposes of the present document, the abbreviations given in TR 21.905 [1] and the following apply. An abbreviation defined in the present document takes precedence over the definition of the same abbreviation, if any, in TR 21.905 [1].

For the purposes of the present document, the following abbreviations apply:

ARQAutomatic Repeat Request

BCHBroadcast Channel

CACarrier Aggregation

CRCCyclic Redundancy Check

DCDual Connectivity

DLDownlink

FECForward Error Correction

GFGrant-Free

MACMedium Access Control

MIMOMultiple Input Multiple Output

PBCHPhysical Broadcast Channel

PCHPaging Channel

PDCCHPhysical Downlink Control Channel

PDSCHPhysical Downlink Shared Channel

PRACHPhysical Random Access Channel

PUCCHPhysical Uplink Control Channel

PUSCHPhysical Uplink Shared Channel

RACHRandom Access Channel

RFRadio Frequency

RNTIRadio Network Temporary Identifier

SCHShared Channel

SISystem Information

SPSSemi-Persistent Scheduling

SRSSounding Reference Signal

TPCTransmit Power Control

ULUplink

# 4Services and functions of the physical layer

## 4.1General

The physical layer offers data transport services to higher layers.

The access to these services is through the use of transport channels via the MAC sub-layer.

A transport block is defined as the data delivered by MAC layer to the physical layer and vice versa.

## 4.2Overview of L1 functions

As mentioned in [2, TS 38.201], the physical layer is expected to perform the following functions to provide the data transport service:

-Error detection on the transport channel and indication to higher layers;

-FEC encoding/decoding of the transport channel;

-Hybrid ARQ soft-combining;

-Rate matching of the coded transport channel to physical channels;

-Mapping of the coded transport channel onto physical channels;

-Power weighting of physical channels;

-Modulation and demodulation of physical channels;

-Frequency and time synchronisation;

-Radio characteristics measurements and indication to higher layers;

-Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) antenna processing;

-RF processing.

L1 functions are modelled for each transport channel in clause 5.

# 5Model of physical layer of the UE

The 5G-NR physical-layer model captures those characteristics of the 5G-NR physical-layer that are relevant from the point-of-view of higher layers. More specifically, the physical-layer model captures:

-The structure of higher-layer data being passed down to or up from the physical layer;

-The means by which higher layers can configure the physical layer;

-The different indications (error indications, channel-quality indications, etc.) that are provided by the physical layer to higher layers.

## 5.1Uplink model

### 5.1.1Uplink shared channel

The physical-layer model for Uplink Shared Channel transmission is described based on the corresponding PUSCH physical-layer-processing chain, see Figure 5.1.1-1. Processing steps that are relevant for the physical-layer model, e.g. in the sense that they are configurable by higher layers, are highlighted in blue.

-Higher-layer data passed to/from the physical layer

-CRC and transport-block-error indication

-FEC and rate matching

-Data modulation

-Mapping to physical resource

-Multi-antenna processing

-Support of L1 control and Hybrid-ARQ-related signalling

Figure 5.1.1-1: Physical-layer model for UL-SCH transmission

### 5.1.2Random access channel

The physical-layer model for RACH transmission is characterized by a PRACH preamble format that consists of a cyclic prefix, a preamble, and a guard time during which nothing is transmitted.

## 5.2Downlink model

### 5.2.1Downlink shared channel

The physical-layer model for Downlink Shared Channel transmission is described based on the corresponding PDSCH physical-layer-processing chain, see Figure 5.2.1-1. Processing steps that are relevant for the physical-layer model, e.g. in the sense that they are configurable by higher layers, are highlighted in blue.

-Higher-layer data passed to/from the physical layer;

-CRC and transport-block-error indication;

-FEC and rate matching;

-Data modulation;

-Mapping to physical resource;

-Multi-antenna processing;

-Support of L1 control and Hybrid-ARQ-related signalling.

Figure 5.2.1-1: Physical-layer model for DL-SCH transmission

### 5.2.2Broadcast channel

The physical-layer model for BCH transmission is characterized by a fixed pre-defined transport format. There is one transport block for the BCH every 80ms. The BCH physical-layer model is described based on the corresponding PBCH physical-layer-processing chain, see Figure 5.2.2-1:

-Higher-layer data passed to/from the physical layer;

-CRC and transport-block-error indication;

-FEC and rate matching;

-Data modulation;

-Mapping to physical resource;

-Multi-antenna processing.

Figure 5.2.2-1: Physical-layer model for BCH transmission

### 5.2.3Paging channel

The physical-layer model for PCH transmission is described based on the corresponding physical-layer-processing chain, see Figure 5.2.3-1. The PCH is carried on PDSCH. Processing steps that are relevant for the physical-layer model, e.g. in the sense that they are configurable by higher layers, are highlighted in blue.

-Higher-layer data passed to/from the physical layer;

-CRC and transport-block-error indication;

-FEC and rate matching;

-Data modulation;

-Mapping to physical resource;

-Multi-antenna processing.

Figure 5.2.3-1: Physical-layer model for PCH transmission

## 5.3Sidelink model

### 5.3.1Sidelink shared channel

The physical-layer model for Sidelink Shared Channel transmission is described based on the corresponding SL-SCH physical-layer-processing chain, see Figure 5.3.1-1. Processing steps that are relevant for the physical-layer model, e.g. in the sense that they are configurable by higher layers, are highlighted in blue.

-Higher-layer data passed to/from the physical layer;

-CRC and transport-block-error indication;

-FEC and rate matching;

-Data modulation;

-Mapping to physical resource;

-Multi-antenna processing;

-Support of L1 control and Hybrid-ARQ-related signalling.

Figure 5.3.1-1: Physical-layer model for SL-SCH transmission

### 5.3.2Broadcast channel

The physical-layer model for Sidelink Broadcast Channel transmission is characterized by a fixed pre-defined transport format. There is one transport block for every slot in which the UE transmits SL-BCH, if the UE is configured to transmit on SL-BCH. The SL-BCH physical-layer model is described based on the corresponding SL-BCH physical-layer-processing chain, see Figure 5.3.2-1:

-Higher-layer data passed to/from the physical layer;

-CRC and transport-block-error indication;

-FEC and rate matching;

-Data modulation;

-Mapping to physical resource;

-Multi-antenna processing.

Figure 5.3.2-1: Physical-layer model for SL-BCH transmission

# 6Simultaneous transmission and reception of physical channels and physical signals

This clause describes the requirements from the UE to send and receive multiple physical channels and physical signals simultaneously depending on the capabilities and service requirements. The following notation is used between both the uplink and downlink clauses below.

-p is the number of uplink carriers configured for the UE on which physical channels can be transmitted

-p' is the number of uplink carriers configured for the UE on which SRS can be transmitted

-q is the number of downlink carriers configured for the UE

-j is the number of cell groups configured for the UE.

-k is the number of PUCCH groups configured for the UE.

## 6.1Uplink

The tables 6.1-1 and 6.1-2 describe the possible combinations of physical channels and SRS that can be sent in simultaneously in the uplink by one UE. Table 6.1-1 introduces notation for a "Transmission Type" which represents a physical channel or sounding reference signal, and any associated transport channel. Table 6.1-2 describes the combinations of these "Transmission Types" which are supported by the UE depending on capabilities [8, TS 38.306], and enumerates how many of each can be transmitted simultaneously.

Table 6.1-1: Uplink "Transmission Types"

| "Transmission Type" | Physical Channel or SRS | AssociatedTransport Channel | Comment |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| A | PRACH | RACH | Note 1, Note 3 |
| B | PUCCH | N/A |  |
| C | PUSCH | UL-SCH | Note 2, Note 3 |
| D | SRS | N/A |  |
| Note 1:RACH corresponds to contention based.Note 2:UCI on PUSCH without UL-SCH is possible. Note 3:For SCell, MsgA PRACH and MsgA PUSCH is not supported. |  |  |  |

Table 6.1-2: Uplink "Transmission Type" combinations

| Supported Combinations | Comment |
| --- | --- |
| j x A | Note 1 |
| k x B | Note 2 |
| (C | Note 3, Note 4, Note 10 |
| p' x D | Note 3, Note 5 |
| A + B | Note 6 |
| A + C | Note 6, Note 10 |
| A + D | Note 6 |
| B + C | Note 8, Note 10 |
| B + C | Note 9, Note 10 |
| B + D | Note 7 |
| C + D | Note 7, Note 10 |
| Note 1:The number of cell groups j in the supported combination is subject to UE capability.Note 2:The number of PUCCH groups k in the supported combination is subject to UE capability. Note 3:The number of carriers p, and p' in the supported combinations are subject to UE capability. Note 4:In the case there is one SUL carrier, then p-1 would be supported.Note 5:UE may be configured with p' but may also have capability to simultaneously sound less than this number. Note 6:Simultaneous PRACH with PUCCH (or PUSCH or SRS) is supported only in the case of inter-band CA, with , , , and ' depending on the configuration, and subject to UE capability for parallel transmission.Note 7:Simultaneous SRS with PUCCH (or PUSCH) is supported only in the case of inter-band CA, with , , and ' depending on the configuration, and subject to UE capability for parallel transmission. Note 8:Simultaneous PUCCH and PUSCH(s) for the case that multiple PUCCH groups are configured and the respective PUCCH and PUSCH(s) are transmitted in the different PUCCH groups, with  and .  and  are subject to UE capability for supported number of PUCCH groups and UL carriers, respectively.  and  depend on configuration.Note 9:Simultaneous PUCCH and PUSCH(s) within the same PUCCH group in the case of inter-band CA, depending on the configuration, and subject to UE capability for parallel transmission of PUCCH and PUSCH within the same PUCCH group.Note 10: Simultaneous transmission of up to 2 PUSCHs within the same active UL BWP, with depending on the configuration,  equal to 1 or 2, subject to UE capability for parallel transmission of PUSCH and PUSCH within the same active UL BWP. |  |

## 6.2Downlink

The tables 6.2-1, 6.2-2 describe the possible combinations of physical channels that can be received simultaneously in the downlink by one UE. Table 6.2-1 introduces notation for a "Reception Type" which represents a physical channel and any associated transport channel. Table 6.2-2 describes the combinations of these "Reception Types" which are supported by the UE depending on capabilities [8, TS 38.306], and enumerates how many of each can be received simultaneously. The UE shall be able to receive all TBs according to the indication on PDCCH. Any subset of the combinations specified in table 6.2-2 is also supported.

Table 6.2-1: Downlink "Reception Types"

| "Reception Type" | Physical Channel(s) | MonitoredRNTI | AssociatedTransport Channel | Comment |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| A | PBCH | N/A | BCH |  |
| B | PDCCH+PDSCH | SI-RNTI | DL-SCH | Note 1 |
| C0 | PDCCH | P-RNTI | N/A | Note 1, Note 2 |
| C1 | PDCCH+PDSCH | P-RNTI | PCH | Note 1 |
| D0 | PDCCH+PDSCH | RA-RNTI or Temporary C-RNTI or  MsgB-RNTI | DL-SCH | Note 3 |
| D1 | PDCCH+PDSCH | C-RNTI, CS-RNTI, MCS-C-RNTI | DL-SCH |  |
| D2 | PDCCH | C-RNTI, CS-RNTI, MCS-C-RNTI | DL-SCH |  |
| D3 | PDCCH+PDSCH | G-RNTI, G-CS-RNTI | DL-SCH | Note 6 |
| D4 | PDCCH | G-CS-RNTI | N/A | Note 7 |
| D5 | PDCCH+PDSCH | MCCH-RNTI | DL-SCH | Note 8 |
| D6 | PDCCH+PDSCH | G-RNTI | DL-SCH | Note 9 |
| D7 | PDCCH+PDSCH | C-RNTI | DL-SCH | Note 10 |
| D8 | PDCCH+PDSCH | Multicast MCCH-RNTI | DL-SCH | Note 11 |
| E | PDCCH | C-RNTI | N/A | Note 4 |
| F0 | PDCCH | Temporary C-RNTI | UL-SCH | Note 3 |
| F1 | PDCCH | C-RNTI, CS-RNTI, MCS-C-RNTI | UL-SCH |  |
| F2 | PDCCH | C-RNTI, CS-RNTI | UL-SCH | Note 10 |
| G | PDCCH | SFI-RNTI | N/A |  |
| H | PDCCH | INT-RNTI | N/A |  |
| J0 | PDCCH | TPC-PUSCH-RNTI | N/A |  |
| J1 | PDCCH | TPC-PUCCH-RNTI | N/A |  |
| J2 | PDCCH | TPC-SRS-RNTI | N/A |  |
| K | PDCCH | SP-CSI-RNTI | N/A |  |
| L0 | PDCCH | SL-RNTI | SL-SCH |  |
| L1 | PDCCH | SL-CS-RNTI | SL-SCH |  |
| M | PDCCH | SL Semi-Persistent Scheduling V-RNTI | SL-SCH | Note 5 |
| N | PDCCH | PS-RNTI | N/A |  |
| O | PDCCH | AI-RNTI | N/A |  |
| P | PDCCH | CI-RNTI | N/A |  |
| Q | PDCCH | PEI-RNTI | N/A | Note 1 |
| Note 1:These are received from PCell only.Note 2:In some cases UE is only required to monitor the short message within the DCI for P-RNTI.Note 3:These are received from PCell or PSCell.Note 4:This corresponds to PDCCH-ordered PRACH. Note 5:This corresponds to PDCCH scheduling LTE PC5.Note 6:This is for multicast in RRC connected state.Note 7:This corresponds to DL Semi-Persistent Scheduling release for multicast in RRC connected state.Note 8:This is for broadcast MCCH. Note 9:This is for broadcast MTCH. UE is not required to decode more than one PDSCH for MTCH simultaneously.Note 10:This is for small data transmission in RRC inactive state.Note 11: This is for multicast MCCH in RRC inactive state. |  |  |  |  |

Table 6.2-2: Downlink "Reception Type" combinations

| Supported Combinations | Comment |
| --- | --- |
| PCell | PSCell | SCell |  |
| 1. RRC_IDLE |  |
| 1.1 All UEs |  |
| A + (B and/or (C1 or Q) and/or D0) + F0 |  |  | Note 1 |
| 1.2 UEs supporting MBS broadcast reception |  |
| A+D5 |  |  |  |
| 2. RRC_INACTIVE |  |
| 2.1 All UEs |  |
| A + (B and/or (C0 or C1 or Q) and/or (D0 or D7)) + (F0 or F2) |  |  | Note 1 |
| 2.2 UEs supporting MBS broadcast reception |  |
| A+D5 |  |  |  |
| 2.3 UE supporting MBS multicast reception |  |
| A+D8 |  |  |  |
| 3. RRC_CONNECTED |  |
| (A + ((C0 + (B and/or (D0 or (m1*D1+m2*D2+((m3*D3+m4*D4) or m5*(D5 or D6))))) + E + F0 + n*F1 + G + H + J0 + J1 + J2 + K + O + L0 + L1 + M + N + P) or D5)) | (A + (D0 or (m1*D1+m2*D2)) + E + F0 + n*F1 + G + H + J0 + J1 + J2 + K + O + N + P) | m1*D1 + m2*D2 + ((m3*D3+m4*D4) or m5*(D5 or D6)) + E + n*F1 + G + H + J0 + J1 + J2 + K + O + L0 + L1 + M + P | Note 2, Note 3, Note 4, Note 5, Note 6, Note 7, Note 8, Note 9, Note 10, Note 11, Note 12, Note13, Note 14 |
| Note 1:UE is not required to decode more than two PDSCH simultaneously, and decoding prioritization when more than two are received is up to UE implementation.Note 2:For PCell, UE is not required to decode SI-RNTI PDSCH simultaneously with C-RNTI PDSCH, unless in FR1.Note 3:Supported combinations are subject to UE capabilities for dual connectivity, carrier aggregation, receiving of group TPC commands, pre-emption indication and dynamic SFI monitoring.Note 4:The values of m2 ≥ 0 and n≥ 0 in the supported combinations are subject to the UE capability. Note 5:Support of monitoring PDCCH with SL-RNTI, SL-CS-RNTI, SL Semi-Persistent Scheduling V-RNTI are subject to UE capability. Note 6:The values of m1 ≥ 1 in the supported combinations are subject to the UE capability. Note 7:In Active time, a UE is not expected to monitor the DCI format for the PDCCH scrambled by PS-RNTI.Note 8:The PDCCH scrambled by PS-RNTI can only be configured on the PCell and PSCell.Note 9:For a UE supporting MBS multicast reception, the values of 1 ≥ m3 ≥ 0 and m4 ≥ 0 are subject to UE capability and applicable to RRC connected UEs. If m3 = 1, then m1 ≤ 1.Note 10:For a UE supporting MBS multicast or broadcast reception, the UE is not expected to be configured simultaneously with more than one component carrier for multicast or broadcast reception.Note 11:For a UE supporting MBS broadcast reception, the values of 1≥m5 ≥ 0 are subject to UE capability and applicable to RRC connected UEs. If m5=1, then m1≤1.Note 12:For a UE supporting MBS broadcast reception in RRC_CONNECTED state, it is required to support reception of FDMed MCCH PDSCH and PBCH in Pcell.Note 13:For a UE supporting MBS multicast or broadcast reception in RRC_CONNECTED state, it is not required to support reception of FDMed MCCH PDSCH/broadcast MTCH PDSCH/multicast MTCH PDSCH and SIB PDSCH in PCell.Note 14:For a UE supporting MBS multicast or broadcast reception in RRC_CONNECTED state, it is not required to support reception of FDMed broadcast MTCH PDSCH/multicast MTCH PDSCH and PBCH in PCell. |  |

## 6.3Sidelink

The tables 6.3-1 and 6.3-2 describe the possible combinations of physical channels that can be sent simultaneously in the sidelink by a UE. Table 6.3-1 introduces notation for a sidelink "Transmission Type" which represents a physical channel, and any associated transport channel. Table 6.3-2 describes the combinations of these "Transmission Types" which are supported by the UE depending on capabilities [8, TS 38.306], and enumerates how many of each can be transmitted simultaneously.

Table 6.3-1: Sidelink "Transmission Types"

| "Transmission Type" | Physical Channel | AssociatedTransport Channel | Comment |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| A | PSBCH | SL-BCH |  |
| B | PSSCH | SL-SCH |  |
| C | PSCCH | SL-SCH |  |
| D | PSFCH | N/A |  |
| E | SL PRS | N/A |  |

Table 6.3-2: Sidelink "Transmission Type" combinations

| Supported Combinations | Comment |
| --- | --- |
| A | Note 2 |
| B | Note 2 |
| C | Note 2 |
| E | Note 4 |
| E | Note 5 |
| D | Note 2 |
| B+C | Note 2 |
| Note 1:Depending on the UE capability, the UE may be able to perform simultaneous Uplink and Sidelink transmissions. If the simultaneous transmission of Sidelink and Uplink is beyond the UE capability, the one not prioritized can be dropped according to [TS 38.321].Note 2:Depending on the UE capability, the UE may be able to perform simultaneous sidelink communication transmissions of the same sidelink “Transmission Type” combinations across multiple SL carriers. Note 3:Simultaneous transmissions over multiple SL carriers with one or more UL carriers is left up to UE implementation.Note 4:Depending on the UE capability, the UE may be able to perform simultaneous SL PRS transmission and PSSCH transmission(s) for a shared SL PRS resource pool across multiple SL carriers.Note 5:Depending on the UE capability, applicable for a dedicated SL PRS resource pool across multiple SL carriers. |  |

The tables 6.3-3 and 6.3-4 describe the possible combinations of physical channels that can be received simultaneously in the sidelink by a UE. Table 6.3-3 introduces notation for a sidelink "Reception Type" which represents a physical channel, and any associated transport channel. Table 6.3-4 describes the combinations of these "Reception Types" which are supported by the UE depending on capabilities [8, TS 38.306], and enumerates how many of each can be received simultaneously.

Table 6.3-3: Sidelink "Reception Types"

| "Reception Type" | Physical Channel | AssociatedTransport Channel | Comment |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| A | PSBCH | SL-BCH |  |
| B | PSSCH | SL-SCH |  |
| C | PSCCH | SL-SCH |  |
| D | PSFCH | N/A |  |
| E | SL PRS | N/A |  |

Table 6.3-4: Sidelink "Reception Type" combinations

| Supported Combinations | Comment |
| --- | --- |
| A |  |
| B | Note 1, Note 2 |
| C | Note 1, Note 2 |
| E | Note 3, Note 5 |
| E | Note 4 |
| D | Note 2 |
| B+C | Note 1, Note 2 |
| Note 1:Corresponds to simultaneous reception within one sub-channelNote 2:Depending on the UE capability, the UE may be able to perform simultaneous sidelink communication receptions of the same sidelink “Reception Type” combinations across multiple SL carriers.Note 3:Applicable for a shared SL PRS resource pool. Corresponds to simultaneous reception within one sub-channel.Note 4:Applicable for a dedicated SL PRS resource pool with M1≥1. Corresponds to simultaneous reception within one dedicated SL PRS resource pool.Note 5:For a shared SL PRS resource pool, depending on the UE capability, the reception(s) of SL-PRS in a single SL carrier can be simultaneously received with PSSCH in other one or more SL carrier(s). |  |

# 7Measurements provided by the physical layer

## 7.1UE measurements

The list and detailed definition of UE measurements is provided in [7, TS 38.215].

Annex A (informative):Change history

| Change history |
| --- |
| Date | Meeting | TDoc | CR | Rev | Cat | Subject/Comment | New version |
| 2017-05 | RAN1#89 | R1-1712013 |  |  |  | Draft skeleton | 0.0.0 |
| 2017-07 | AH_1706 | R1-1712013 |  |  |  | Update for agreements from meetings up to RAN1 NR AH2 | 0.0.1 |
| 2017-08 | RAN1#90 | R1-1713371 |  |  |  | Update for agreements from meetings up to RAN1 NR AH2 | 0.0.2 |
| 2017-08 | RAN1#90 | R1-1714655 |  |  |  | Update with change marks removed for RAN1 #90 endorsement | 0.1.0 |
| 2017-09 | RAN1#90 | R1-1715320 |  |  |  | Updated with minor editorial changes for review after RAN1 #90 | 0.1.1 |
| 2017-09 | RAN#77 | RP-172006 |  |  |  | For information to plenary | 1.0.0 |
| 2017-10 | RAN1#90b | R1-1719229 |  |  |  | Updated for agreements from meetings up to RAN1 #90b | 1.0.1 |
| 2017-11 | RAN1#91 | R1-1721047 |  |  |  | Updated after email discussion | 1.1.0 |
| 2017-12 | RAN1#91 | R1-1721340 |  |  |  | Updated to reflect agreements from RAN1 #91 | 1.2.0 |
| 2017-12 | RAN#78 | RP-172630 |  |  |  | Endorsed version for approval by plenary | 2.0.0 |
| 2017-12 | RAN#78 |  |  |  |  | Approved by plenary – Rel-15 spec under change control | 15.0.0 |
| 2018-03 | RAN#79 | RP-180200 | 0001 | - | F | CR capturing the Jan18 ad-hoc and RAN1#92 meeting agreements | 15.1.0 |
| 2018-06 | RAN#80 | RP-181172 | 0002 | 1 | F | CR to 38.202 capturing the RAN1#92bis and RAN1#93 meeting agreements | 15.2.0 |
| 2018-06 | RAN#80 | RP-181257 | 0003 | - | B | CR to 38.202 capturing the RAN1#92bis and RAN1#93 meeting agreements related to URLLC | 15.2.0 |
| 2018-09 | RAN#81 | RP-181789 | 0004 | - | B | CR to 38.202 capturing RAN1#94 meeting agreements | 15.3.0 |
| 2018-12 | RAN#82 | RP-182523 | 0005 | - | F | CR to 38.202 capturing RAN1#95 meeting agreements | 15.4.0 |
| 2019-06 | RAN#84 | RP-191277 | 0006 | - | F | Correction to simultaneous reception of DL Channels | 15.5.0 |
| 2019-06 | RAN#84 | RP-191277 | 0007 | - | F | CR on inclusion of TC-RNTI for monitored RNTI for UL-SCH and inclusion of monitoring PDCCH ordering PRACH on SCell | 15.5.0 |
| 2019-12 | RAN#86 | RP-192623 | 0008 | 1 | F | CR on simultaneous transmission of UL channels | 15.6.0 |
| 2019-12 | RAN#86 | RP-192635 | 0009 | - | B | Introduction of two-step RACH | 16.0.0 |
| 2019-12 | RAN#86 | RP-192637 | 0010 | - | B | Introduction of integrated access and backhaul for NR | 16.0.0 |
| 2019-12 | RAN#86 | RP-192638 | 0011 | - | B | Introduction of V2X | 16.0.0 |
| 2019-12 | RAN#86 | RP-192639 | 0012 | - | B | Introduction of Physical Layer Enhancements for URLLC | 16.0.0 |
| 2019-12 | RAN#86 | RP-192641 | 0013 | - | B | Introduction of MIMO enhancements | 16.0.0 |
| 2019-12 | RAN#86 | RP-192642 | 0014 | - | B | Introduction of UE Power Savings | 16.0.0 |
| 2020-06 | RAN#88-e | RP-200692 | 0015 | - | F | Corrections to MIMO enhancements | 16.1.0 |
| 2020-09 | RAN#89-e | RP-201810 | 0017 | - | F | DL Channel Combination associated with DCI format 2_6 monitoring | 16.2.0 |
| 2020-09 | RAN#89-e | RP-201807 | 0018 | - | F | Corrections on 5G V2X sidelink features | 16.2.0 |
| 2021-12 | RAN#94-e | RP-212960 | 0019 | - | F | Alignment CR for TS 38.202 | 16.3.0 |
| 2021-12 | RAN#94-e | RP-212968 | 0020 | - | B | Introduction of IIoT/URLLC enhancements in NR | 17.0.0 |
| 2021-12 | RAN#94-e | RP-212979 | 0021 | - | B | Introduction of multicast and broadcast services | 17.0.0 |
| 2022-03 | RAN#95-e | RP-220263 | 0022 | - | F | Corrections to NR support of multicast and broadcast services | 17.1.0 |
| 2022-03 | RAN#95-e | RP-220256 | 0023 | - | F | Corrections on NR UE Power Saving Enhancements | 17.1.0 |
| 2022-06 | RAN#96 | RP-221612 | 0024 | - | F | Corrections to NR support of multicast and broadcast services | 17.2.0 |
| 2022-12 | RAN#98-e | RP-222864 | 0025 | - | F | CR on the MBS reception type combinations to TS 38.202 | 17.3.0 |
| 2023-09 | RAN#101 | RP-232450 | 0026 | - | F | Correction on simultaneous reception of SDT and other channels in TS 38.202 | 17.4.0 |
| 2023-09 | RAN#101 | RP-232458 | 0027 | - | B | Release 18 TS38.202 Editor CR for MIMO | 18.0.0 |
| 2023-09 | RAN#101 | RP-232469 | 0028 | - | B | Release 18 TS38.202 Editor CR for NR sidelink evolution | 18.0.0 |
| 2023-12 | RAN#102 | RP-233723 | 0031 | 1 | A | Correction on NR Sidelink | 18.1.0 |
| 2023-12 | RAN#102 | RP-233733 | 0032 | - | B | Release 18 TS38.202 Editor CR for multicast in RRC_INACTIVE state | 18.1.0 |
| 2023-12 | RAN#102 | RP-233719 | 0033 | - | F | Release 18 TS38.202 Editor CR for SL-PRS transmission and Reception | 18.1.0 |
| 2024-03 | RAN#103 | RP-240528 | 0034 | - | F | Release 18 TS38.202 Editor CR for simultaneous SL-PRS transmission and Reception | 18.2.0 |
| 2024-06 | RAN#104 | RP-241061 | 0035 | - | F | Correction to 38.202 on support of combination of SL CA and SL positioning | 18.3.0 |
| 2024-09 | RAN#105 | RP-242204 | 0036 | - | F | Rel-18 Editorial Corrections for TS 38.202 | 18.4.0 |
| 2025-09 | SA#109 | - | - | - | - | Update to Rel-19 version (MCC) | 19.0.0 |
